So using push notifications makes sense because we get a lot of benefits out of it,
that of course leads us to the question, how does push notifications work, how do they work especially
in a web app?
Let's start simple, let's consider our web app which has the service worker running in the background.
Now push notifications actually contain of two parts,
we have push which means that some thing, some server pushes some information to our application
and we have notifications which is what we showed to the user in the end
and in this module, I will of course show both to you and I will show you how to connect it.
So first of all, we need the user to enable notifications,
we need to prompt for permission and I will show you how this works,
otherwise we can't show any notifications
and that also means we can send push messages to our web app from any server.
So that's the first step, we have to ask the user for permission,
this is a one time task though, once we have permission it's always granted.
Of course the user could remove it through browser tools but if he doesn't do that, we have these notifications
in future instances of this web application too. Now with notifications enabled, we can already display
notifications, that's important,
it's totally independent of pushing messages to our app.
We can start displaying notifications
and this is actually the first part
I will show in this course too
but let's move further and let's dive into the push part of notifications, of push notifications. Notifications
themselves are triggered from Javascript
but of course that becomes most interesting if we push messages from some other server to our web
application.
Imagine an application where users can create posts and we want to inform all the users about new posts,
well then we can push this message that a new post was created to all web apps that subscribed in our
service. That is the keyword, subscription. In the web app,
we can check for existing push subscriptions
and here's one important thing, a subscription refers to a browser on a given device.
So if you use Chrome on Mac, you may subscribe with this browser device combination to push
and if you use Firefox on the same Mac, you could set up a new subscription there, the subscription will
be managed by the browser for you,
you use the service worker to request and work with subscriptions.
So you can check if you already have an existing subscription because maybe the users set one up in
the past,
if that's not the case, you can create a new one and I will show you how this works in this module.
Now a new subscription is created in Javascript with the service worker,
however we need more information than just our web app and the service worker. Subscriptions for push
notifications of course need external servers because a push notification needs to be delivered to our
web application
and for that we need other servers,
otherwise it's just our web app and if our web app is closed, there's no way we could show a notification,
we could send any information to anything.
Now a subscription as I just said is referring to a browser device combination
and to deliver a message per push to our web app, we need help by the browser because by default, our
web app is just running and is not receiving any incoming messages.
We could build something using web sockets but that's a totally different technology and also only works
if our web app is open,
so we need the help of the browser to get informed even if our web app isn't open.
That's why I created subscription, any subscription involves some information by the browser vendor or
namely each browser vendor has its own push server.
So Google has its own server handling push messages,
Mozilla has its own server and so on.
We don't configure the servers, we don't own them,
they are owned by Google, Mozilla and so on
but when we set up a new subscription in Javascript, Javascript will automatically reach out to that
push server you could say and fetch an endpoint for us.
Now this endpoint is simply a URL to which we can later send new push messages so that the browser
vendor service here, the brown box, will forward them to our web app.
So a newly created subscription holds that information, the push API endpoint.
It will also hold some authentication information to make sure that only we can push to our web app
because everyone with this endpoint could send push messages there,
therefore in this module, I will also show you how to check it, how to pass additional authentication
information to the subscription to make sure that even if someone else finds out this API endpoint, he
can't start pushing messages to your users which you definitely don't want because they would show up
in the scope of your app and if someone pushes them, some porn or worse content maybe, not that great.
So this is one side, we have a subscription with an endpoint to which we can deliver push messages.
We also need our own server though,
now this can be the same server serving your web app, so your HTML and Javascript and CSS files or
it's a different server. So you can have a fullstack set up here where you have your back-end server
rendering out different pages which happen to use service workers or your web app is a standalone single
page application and your back-end server is a rest API to which you reach out from that single page application.
Both works,
the main thing is you need a server which you work on where you can run your code and you can't do this
on the browser vendor push server,
these are managed for you.
So your custom back-end server where you can run your own code,
that's important.
It's important because the service worker which creates this new subscription which holds information
about that endpoint and so on
this browser vendor push server endpoint, your service worker can now send this created subscription
to your back-end server to store it there.
Why store it in the server?
Well to keep it, if you would store it in your web app,
not only could you not really work with it due to the way push works,
it also would be lost at the point of time you shut your web app down.
Yes you could store it in indexedDB or something like that
but even that is not a persistent storage.
So we store it on our back-end server in some database there because it will be our back-end server
which later wants to push messages to the front-end app.
Again consider that example of users creating new posts, that of course in the end happens on the server,
we store new posts in the database there.
We could then after we store them in the database, also issue push messages to all our subscriptions
and keep in mind, the subscription is simply a browser device combination.
So if we have 10 users on different devices with different browsers, we would have ten subscriptions
maybe and we could inform them all about a new post and we do that from our back-end server.
That's why the back-end server has subscriptions.
Now something happens which wants us to push notifications to the web apps,
for example this new post which was created. So we decide to send a new push notification
and of course I will show you how this works in this module too,
so we execute some server side code to do so and this push notification is then sent to the browser
vendor push server to this API endpoint we stored in the subscription. This reaches the push
server by the browser vendor, we also send some authentication information with that push message
to be able to really deliver it to the web app and the browser vendor push server then delivers it
to our web application,
to be precise it delivers that to the service worker by triggering the push event there.
That's especially event we can listen to with the event listener in the service worker
and then in the service worker, we can display a notification in our web app and if that sounds very complex,
no worries,
it's not, we will walk through all these phases step-by-step in this module.
I will show you how to get a new subscription, how to store it on a server, how to push a notification to
a browser vendor server, how to react to it in the service worker and how to display notifications.
Actually displaying notifications is with which I'll start since this works standalone and is a key
building block of this whole picture.